---
title: "How to marry a Japanese girl"
description: "A brief description of the legal hell you throw yourself into the
    moment you and your loved one decide to have an international marriage."
tags: [japan]
---

My older and more experienced co-workers tell me marriage is already one giant
headache as it is, and while I can't vouch for that one just yet, I definitely
can share with you just how confusing and time-consuming it is to obtain all the
legal documents a Czech person needs to obtain if he wishes to marry a citizen
of Japan, in Japan.

The first obstacle you'll likely face is the utter lack of official government
information on this topic. While I understand this is something that's likely
relevant to only quite a small percentage of Czech citizens, I would have still
expected a better availability of information. Or, any information at all, for
that matter.

After consulting multiple sources including the Czech embassy in Japan and
multiple registry offices, I'm fairly confident I have *the most definitive
list* of documents required for the rest of this process to go smoothly, and by
sharing it I'm hoping to help anyone who might find themselves in a similar
situation. The process and required documents should be fairly similar for many
different country combinations, it's not strictly specific to just Czech-Japan.

## The required documents

As for me, the person coming to the foreign country and asking it to allow me to
marry one of the country's citizens, most of the bureaucratic burden lies on my
shoulders; on the other hand, my significant other will just simply have to
present the same documents she would have to present if she were to marry a
local guy.

There's three parts of the Triforce that I will need to bring with me:

- a valid passport;
- a copy of birth certificate;
- a certificate of legal eligibility for marriage (sometimes also called
    *certificate of no impediment to marriage*).

The first one, passport, is the most obvious and easy one, as you really should
have one if you... you know, actually want to go to a foreign country. Just make
sure it's valid today and will stay valid for at least a few months more,
ideally have it valid for at least a year more by the time you decide to get
married. As for the other two documents... are you ready to visit a lot of
different government offices? You better be.

## Copy of birth certificate

Contrary to the simple name of the paper, just making a photocopy of your birth
certificate is obviously not enough; surprisingly, even going to CzechPoint or a
notary office to get a verified copy is also not good enough.

What you actually need to do is this: first go to the registry office of the
town you were born in (it can't be a registry office of any other city) and ask
for a duplicate of birth certificate. You'll need your ID and it'll set you back
100 Kč (&#8776;&nbsp;$3.8); if you can't personally go to the office yourself,
your closest family members (i.e. your parents, kids, grandparents,
grandchildren and siblings) are also eligible to request this document on your
behalf, as well as anyone with valid Power of Attorney signed by you.

But wait, there's more.

This birth certificate duplicate needs to be verified twice: the first
verification must be performed by a registry office belonging to a county town
of the town of your permanent residence while the second verification (also
called *apostille*) must be done by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Prague.

The first verification is free while having the apostille issued will cost you
100 Kč (&#8776;&nbsp;$3.8) paid in duty stamps that must be purchased
beforehand. You can get these at any post office. Both verification can be
performed by anyone, there's no need for Power of Attorney or for you personally
visiting the offices.

Finally, while I was able to obtain all of these documents instantly but for
each of these three steps, there's a theoretical 30-day time-frame each office
may use if they are swamped with other requests or otherwise busy.

## Certificate of legal eligibility for marriage

To obtain this certificate, you have to visit the registry office in the town of
your permanent residence. Bring the original birth certificate, government ID
and 500 Kč (&#8776;&nbsp;$24.2) with you; if your government ID doesn't contain
your family status or the address of your permanent residence, you need to bring
confirmations of both information first, and I'm quite frankly not sure where to
get these two confirmations as I didn't need to obtain these two.

You don't have to do this personally but having someone else request the
certificate is a royal pain in the arse. You'll not only have to grant this
person a really specific Power of Attorney that the registry office will keep
(seriously, it can't be broad or generic Power of Attorney, it has to
specifically mention that its sole purpose is requesting and accepting
certificate of legal eligibility for marriage) and a copy of your government ID
but you'll also have to download a form for requesting the certificate,
pre-fill it by hand, sign it and ship it to the person that will be requesting
the certificate for you.

After you obtain the certificate, you can proceed with verifying the certificate
the same way as you verified the copy of birth certificate. The smarter of us
may correctly guess that verifying both the birth certificate and certificate of
eligibility at the same time might be a reasonably smart idea unless wasting
your time some more is your fetish.

Congratulations, you have successfully completed the Triforce of Bureaucratic
Nonsense! It's slightly less powerful than Legend of Zelda's Triforce, but
certainly way more tedious to obtain.

## Czech your language!

At this moment, I'm not one hundred percent sure. We have information from
Japanese city hall that they'll be fine with the roughly million-times verified
documents written in Czech and literally any sort of translation to Japanese; in
fact, they suggested that my fiancée can translate the documents from Czech to
Japanese and they'll just blindly trust it. That fact alone somewhat undermines
all the troubles with verification I had to undergo, but at this point, I'm
certainly not going to complain. If this information proves to be incorrect in
the future, I'll make sure to update the article accordingly.

Oh, and if you thought this process alone was migraine-inducing, just wait until
I get the opportunity to describe how to have your Japanese marriage recognized
back in your home country. But that's a topic for another article.
