---
title: "How to get a job in Japan"
description: "I swear I have been putting of writing this article for a really
    long time. In the following paragraphs, I will try to describe my road to
    Japan (which necessarily involves getting a job first) and hopefully provide
    a few advices that could help anyone wishing to pursue the same path."
tags: [japan]
---

For me, it all started in January 2017. When Kumi was visiting me in Prague at
that time, we were having a serious discussion about whether she would be moving
to Czech Republic or I should move to Japan. As the title of this website
suggests, we chose the second path, and it couldn't have been a more difficult
decision -- or rather a decision that would lead to a lot of hardships. I don't
mean to scare anyone right in the first paragraph -- I mean, I am still in the
phase where I definitely don't regret doing this and everything around me is
still awesome (with the exception of Japanese banks, but more on that topic in
another article) -- but I'm not going to lie and say that it was easy, because
it was not.

First, let's make sure we're on the same page -- why would one search for a job
online instead of coming to the country directly and looking for a job in
person? Well, if I overlook the obvious financial and few more legal reasons,
the most striking problem is the fact that as a tourist on tourist visas, you
can stay in the country for three months only, not a day more. So you'd have to
rely on your ability to find a job in less than three months (during which you'd
have to be staying in hotels, as you wouldn't be able to rent a property on your
own) and even if you were capable of doing that, the entire process of getting a
work visas would still take three months on its own, so you'd still have to
return to your home country before the entire process was finished. The only
shortcut I can realistically think of is obtaining a marriage visas, but I
haven't tried that path so I can't give any advice on whether it would work or
not. You can definitely share your story in the comments if you know more on
this!

## What do you want to do?

The first question you have to ask yourself is -- do you want to find a job in
your field, or do you want to come here as an English language teacher? I have
heard from many people that the latter is significantly easier and if you're
interested in pursuing this option, you should definitely check
[JET Programme](http://jetprogramme.org/en/) and
[Interac](https://www.interacnetwork.com/recruit/). I was, however, worried
about the gap it would create in my résumé and how it could affect obtaining my
next job in IT much more difficult, so I decided to find a job related to IT.

One thing that should be noted, however, is that if you decide to go with either
of these language programmes, you won't be able to choose a location within
Japan. You may express a preference but chances are you end up in some rural
area of Japan, which can be interesting but it may not be what you're looking
for.

## How long will it take?

The second question you don't have to, but really want to ask yourself is -- how
long will it take for me to find a job in Japan? Obviously, that will differ
from person to person; I have heard from Kumi that it usually takes from one to
three years to find a job from abroad, but my reality was slightly better than
that -- it took me eleven months to find a job here, and then additional four
months of obtaining the work visas. Factors affecting the time is of course
your field (for example, IT in general is good, but then again, mobile
development, something I had four years of experience in, is bad, that is quite
often outsourced from Japan to other regions in Asia), experience (including
education -- my Master's degree has been utterly useless for me in Czech
Republic but really impressive in Japan) and perhaps most importantly, language
skill.

Being unable to speak Japanese handicaps you more than I would have imagined
before. It limits you from living in the cities you would perhaps want to live,
as finding job as a non-speaker in Kyoto or Osaka was utterly impossible for me.
As a non-speaker, you're pretty much limited to Tokyo, and even that is
problematic still. It limits you from the kind of companies you can join --
start-ups are mostly a no-no, smaller companies as well, so you have to rely on
being accepted by a large, preferably a global company that doesn't mind you
won't be able to speak Japanese for a while[^1].

[^1]: I have heard [LINE](https://line.me/en/) is quite tolerant when it comes
    to language skill, even going as far as providing Japanese language lesson
    as part of your work-day. I don't exactly know if that's true, just
    reporting it as something I heard.

In general, I would prepare myself for about a year-long journey that will be
surprisingly full of rejections, even if you aren't used to them from your home
country -- that was precisely my experience actually, as I have never not gotten
a job offer after an interview back in Czech Republic.

## Where to search?

During these eleven months of searching for job, I tried many different sites
with various level of results. The first one I found was one lovely called
[GaijinPot Jobs](https://jobs.gaijinpot.com/). At first it seemed like there's
plenty of different job offers but after about two to three months, it started
to seem like I'm perhaps the only person still using that site, as new job
offers stopped appearing. I'm not sure if every company moved elsewhere or if
the site ranked me as "not useful" and stopped showing me new offers, but my
overall experience with GaijinPot Jobs was not a pleasant one, even though I had
a few job interviews organized through that site. Be warned that it seems like a
majority of job offers in GaijinPot Jobs require business level of Japanese.

Next on the list is amusingly named [Daijob](https://www.daijob.com), and it's
probably my favourite of them all. A lot of new offers every day along with
great filtering (although a bit outdated -- you can't search for iOS-related
jobs but you can search for Symbian developers for some reason?) and you can get
new job offers right to your mailbox. Sometimes the companies even scout you
(instead of you having to apply to them), which feels nice in the midst of the
storm of rejections you'll face. Daijob is ultimately a site that landed me my
current job.

Quite similar to Daijob is [CareerCross](https://www.careercross.com). I'm not
sure if there was ever any rational reason for it but it always felt like a site
that's almost like a clone of Daijob, except maybe a bit better-looking. A lot
of the job offers are, however, exactly the same offers you can find on Daijob.
I still recommend it though.

Then there are sites such as [Indeed](https://jp.indeed.com) and
[JobsInJapan](https://www.jobsinjapan.com) but these never yielded any useful
result for me. Maybe you'll be more lucky!

Finally, there's [Wantedly](https://www.wantedly.com), a site on which you can
find mostly smaller companies and start-ups. I got one interview out of it which
I had to attend personally in Tokyo, but it never amounted for anything in the
end.

## What to prepare?

Here's another important part: make sure your résumé is amazing. In Czech
Republic, I always had the feeling that résumé is something I need to have to
get a job interview, but realistically it's a miracle if anyone even skims
through it a bit. Here, it actually matters.

In Czech Republic (and I believe in western world in general), there's a rule
that résumé that's longer than one page is a useless one, as it'll just be
thrown into the trash (or laughed at, then thrown into the trash). Well, throw
that expectation right out of the window, as I understood after a few months (or
more precisely, was advised as a part of rejection) that the more thorough your
résumé is, the better.

For example, the résumé I was sending out most often contained the following
sections:

- a full page of skills and experience, tools I worked with (as in software, not
    names of co-workers), frameworks and languages I know and certificates I
    obtained;
- one third of a page describing my educational background;
- one third of a page with a list of previous companies, including start date,
    end date and a reason for leaving;
- half a page with my personal biography;
- four pages (!) describing in detail what projects I worked on in each of my
    previous companies, size of team, my role in team, techniques used and how
    long it took to finish each project.

If interested, drop me an e-mail and I can send you that résumé as a starter for
you.

Furthermore, having a portfolio of your accomplishments helps sometimes,
especially if your previous work is difficult to describe or the results are not
publicly available -- it helps the company to understand what you accomplished
if you show them more visually and again, in even greater detail.

Finally, be prepared that some companies will actually not be interested in our
western-style résumé at all, and they'll instead require you to send in a
履歴書 (rirekisho). I'm not even going to go into details about how much fun it
is to write this document but in case you needed help,
[there are articles](https://blog.gaijinpot.com/write-japanese-resume/)
[on the Internet](http://tokyographicdesigners.com/the-guide/how-to-complete-a-rirekisho/)
that will help you slightly.

## I got a job, now what?

First of all, congratulations, you're almost here! Depending on your position
and visas sub-type, you'll probably need to supply a few documents to your
future company (who will serve as your visas guarantor) -- very likely your
photo, quite likely also university diplomas translated to English. I went for a
court-verified translation but I'm still not sure if it was strictly necessary;
on the other hand, official instructions say that even court-verified
translation is not sufficient and an translation with an apostille must be
supplied, but that was not my case.

After your future employer has collected everything for the Certificate of
Eligibility application, you can try (and fail) to forget about Japan for the
next three months, because nothing will happen -- until one day, you get an
e-mail from your company, saying that the Certificate of Eligibility was issued
and then the very next day, it will magically arrive in your hands -- at least
that was my case and I think Czech Post should really look into this -- I mean,
apparently it *is* possible to deliver a package within one day and not lose it
three times during the process!

With the Certificate of Eligibility, you can schedule a visit to the Japanese
embassy or consulate (if I remember correctly, you'll need to bring another
photo), fill in a simple form once you're there and within no more than few
days, the visas is finally yours. Just don't forget to arrive in Japan within
three months after that, or your visas become invalid.

I think that's all the advice I can think of right now. Should you wish to take
this journey, I definitely wish you the best of luck and feel free to reach out
to me if anything was unclear and I'll try to help in any way I can. Finally,
quick shout out to [INNTEGRA](https://inntegra.co.jp/) (and especially Anna)
as they were the ones who actually helped me get my job in Japan -- I am forever
grateful for all the help and encouragement provided.
