---
title: "How to de-Googlify your life"
description: "Google, back in the day, used to be one of those companies that
    were loved by everyone and could essentially do no wrong. However, due to
    Google’s actions in the past few years, it feels like that illusion is
    slowly disappearing and the true nature of the company starts slowly
    showing – and honestly, it's not a particularly nice look."
tags: [web]
---

I hope you'll forgive me for not
[thoroughly listing](https://listverse.com/2017/09/24/top-10-ways-google-does-evil/)
[all the reasons](https://www.wired.com/2012/06/opinion-google-is-evil/)
[that make me think](https://gizmodo.com/5878987/its-official-google-is-evil-now)
Google had a pretty good reason for sort-of dropping their "Don't be evil"
motto; in fact, just the YouTube censorship of any content creator that's not
left-leaning enough should make everyone very, very concerned. The intent of
this article, after all, isn't for the most part political -- its main goal is
to introduce a couple of alternatives to popular Google products and tell you my
experience after a few weeks of using them.

Before I get to that though, I would still want to just very briefly touch the
topic of my personal disdain for Google. I don't like how the company tailors
the search results to what they think you'd like -- such behaviour only encloses
you in an echo-chamber of opinions that are the same as yours, or at least very
similar to yours, carefully making sure not to present anything that could
potentially offend you, or worse yet, force you to think critically for a
moment[^1]. Furthermore, I nowadays find myself much less willing than I was
just a few years ago to give up all of my personal data to a company that seems
to be so strongly affected by the current politics, the modern left, the social
justice movement[^2] and diversity of color -- but not by diversity of thoughts.
And while the entire story about James Damore and his "Google Memo" is simply
atrocious and shows poor judgement and misguides principles at work at all
levels of management at Google, I feel like this is just the tip of the iceberg
and we'll see similar stories in the future. Boy, am I glad that by the time
that happens, I will not be on board of the Google ship any more!

[^1]: Admittedly, this trend has been recently replaced somewhat with a
    straight-up removal of any content that's not deemed "politically correct".
    Obviously, that's even worse.

[^2]: Curiously enough, *movement* seems to be a word completely unknown to many
    *social justice warriors* and modern *feminists*.

You may agree or disagree with anything being said up to this point, but it's
actually something entirely different that pushed me over the edge and made me
abandon anything Google-related I could: a simple sentence that states "if
you're not paying for a product, you (as a user) are the product". And in some
of the cases mentioned below, I just didn't want to feel like a product any
longer.

## Replacing Google Search

Let's start with a surprisingly simple replacement: Google Search. I know it
sounds truly terrifying at first -- how could a person possibly function on the
Internet without the friendly uncle Google Search? Well, I haven't used Google
Search (besides a few very rare and minor exceptions that happened when I was
searching for things truly obscure) in over half a year and as you can see, I
have clearly survived.

I tried using [DuckDuckGo](https://duckduckgo.com) but at that time, it was not
my cup of coffee -- although I intend to give DDG another try in the future.
During the past six months, I have become a happy user of
[StartPage](https://www.startpage.com/), a search engine that actually uses
Google's unfiltered search results but doesn't reveal any identifying
information about you to Google: you will lose the personalized search results
(that's **a good thing**) and get your privacy back. On top of that, it has a
lovely dark mode, offers a private proxy for viewing image results (nice!) and
can be configured to use `POST` method instead of `GET` when searching, thus
hiding your search terms from webmasters of sites you reach from search results.

## Ousting Google Chrome

After Google Search had to go, Google Chrome was the next obvious target. I
remembered the days of my youth with [Opera](https://www.opera.com) and while
it's not a bad browser at all, something didn't feel quite right. I skipped
Safari because I wanted a real browser, not a half-functional toy, and I moved
right past Firefox because that's always been the sensible thing to do.
Eventually, I found [Vivaldi](https://vivaldi.com/) and have not looked back
since.

Sure, the first couple of weeks were sort of rocky as I was still using two
separate computers and Vivaldi didn't offer synchronisation back then, but
everything else felt right from the get-go. It's a browser made by the people
that created the original Opera browser back when it was good (and before you
say anything, *yes, Opera was stellar back then*) that still keeps the original
ideas and spirit of Opera alive. If you ever used Opera between versions 8 and
11, prepare to be hit by nostalgia the moment you open Vivaldi's settings tab.
It runs on WebKit and supports nearly all Chrome extensions[^3]. It has sidebar
panels, tab stacking, split view, notes, crazy history view, whole page
screenshots, day-night themes, mouse gestures, a full keyboard mode and more. I
honestly can not recommend it enough.

[^3]: While modern Opera also supports a lot of Chrome extensions, Vivaldi fared
    better for me when it comes to the extension support. Out of 28 extensions
    I actively use, all 28 works perfectly in Vivaldi, whereas in modern Opera,
    I managed to get only around ~25 of them working.

## Taking out Gmail

So far, so good, but I knew getting rid of Gmail and G Suite would be... a bit
more painful. Ever since I started using StartPage as the search engine of
choice, I had my eyes on [StartMail](https://www.startmail.com/) as a Gmail
replacement but ultimately decided against it thanks to the very recent
discovery of [Zoho Workplace](https://www.zoho.eu/workplace/). Unlike StartMail,
their webmail client doesn't support the PGP encryption which is utterly
unfortunate, but the entire suite offers so much more than just a mail server:
as part of the Workplace bundle, you get online Word (called
[Zoho Writer](https://www.zoho.eu/writer/))/Excel
([Zoho Sheet](https://www.zoho.eu/docs/sheet.html))/PowerPoint
([Zoho Show](https://www.zoho.eu/docs/show.html)), a Google Drive equivalent
([Zoho Docs](https://www.zoho.eu/docs/)) and a few smaller applications (an
application for presenting, for creating websites, for creating an intranet site
and a Slack equivalent). They have mobile applications complementing each of
their services, although I haven't tried these just yet -- screenshots look
promising, however!

Honestly, the entire Zoho company intrigues me greatly. Not just because their
pricing is fair nor just because they seem to be focused on their users'
privacy; what intrigues me the most is the sheer amount of products they develop
at the same time. Besides the ones I already mentioned above, they also have
similar application bundles that form a CRM system and an accounting system, and
then they still have a ton of additional standalone applications: not one, but
two different project management systems, a bug tracker, a password manager for
teams, a web conference platform, a wiki system, a help-desk system, an HR
system, a recruitment system... It's simply mind-blowing[^4]!

[^4]: By the way, I really wonder what it must feel like to work in a company
    that thoroughly and properly uses all of Zoho products and takes advantage
    of the integration.

The migration itself was nerve-wracking but actually rather simple, as Zoho's
wizard leads you through the entire process. It starts with changing your
domain's MX records, goes through configuring
[SPF](https://www.zoho.com/mail/help/adminconsole/spf-configuration.html) and
[DKIM](https://www.zoho.com/mail/help/adminconsole/dkim-configuration.html)
records (strangely enough not
[DMARC records](https://www.zoho.com/mail/help/adminconsole/dmarc-policy.html)),
gives you the opportunity to add users and even points you in the general
direction of a migration wizard which can connect to your old e-mail server and
transfer all e-mails via POP3 or IMAP, the latter being a much better and faster
choice -- all of that can be performed either for a single user or in case of
organizations, even for multiple users at the same time.

Overall, I'm very happy with Zoho Mail so far, and I can't wait until I have a
bit of time to try out their mobile applications. If I could wish for three
improvements, it would be a PGP support in their webmail, fixing sent e-mail
duplication when sending messages over SMTP and improving importing of contacts
-- I still wasn't able to successfully complete that one, but it frankly doesn't
bother me too much. For £24 per user per year, I can happily recommend Zoho to
anyone.

## Stepping into Google Docs' shoes

Well, I kind of spoiled this one in the previous section, haven't I? As I
mentioned there, Zoho Docs replaced Google Docs and Google Disc for me. I
noticed that Zoho Docs is not nearly as snappy as Google Docs on my computer,
but due to my infrequent usage of either service, I honestly couldn't care less.

## Superseding Google DNS

The simplest Google service to replace is without a doubt Google DNS. If you
can't bring yourself to migrate away from Gmail, can't think of browsing in
anything else but Chrome and are desperately addicted to Google Search's layout,
the least you can do is to replace Google's `8.8.8.8` DNS server with
[Quad9](https://www.quad9.net/)'s `9.9.9.9`. Big :thumbsup: to the person who
thought of using that particular IP address. If you can't live without
having specified an alternate DNS server, the IP address for that one is
somewhat less memorable `149.112.112.112`. Quad9's
[privacy policy](https://www.quad9.net/privacy/) is not perfect but it seems
fair enough. In the past, I remember using [OpenDNS](https://www.opendns.com/)
but I noticed they were bought by Cisco and I'm not sure how I feel about that.

## What about the rest?

Well, that's the current state of affairs, but despite my best efforts, there is
still a couple of Google services I haven't been able to replace.

The first one being Google Maps; and while Apple Maps is a fine alternative for
navigating from point A to point B (and their public transport information for
Japan are, in fact, much better than what Google Maps offers), finding that
point A, not to mention also the point B -- that's a different matter entirely.
I have never before seen search results that are anywhere close to this level of
awful; it's embarrassing how abysmal the search functionality is, really.

YouTube is another big service that I have no replacement for -- not because
there aren't any competitors, but because the competitors lack the content that
I normally consume. That's a :chicken: and :hatching_chick: problem, though, and
I think it'll resolve itself over time, especially if YouTube continues cranking
up the censorship dial -- and I'm pretty sure they will go all the way to
eleven.

The last two Google services I regularly use and can remember right now is
Google Translate, which really has no similar competitors as far as I can tell,
and Google Analytics, which I could stop using at any moment, but then again --
I don't think even Google can read any meaningful data from the site that sees
five and half visitors on a good day.
