---
title: "How to get an apartment in Japan"
description: "I finally made it to Japan but besides having a job (I wish to
    dedicate a separate article to the process obtaining that at a later date),
    I had the foolish wish of also having the place to live, a place I could
    call my “home”. Here are the steps I had to undergo and the help I had to
    receive, as this task would be impossible to complete on my own."
tags: [japan]
---

As soon as I booked the one-way flight tickets to Japan, I realized that there's
basically less than three weeks left in Czech Republic for me during which I
also need to find my future apartment in Japan -- a process that's quite tricky
and lengthy on its own, not to mention that I couldn't even properly begin it
without knowing which day would be my first in Japan. I have to admit, being
faced with harsh reality and even harsher timeline like that freaked me out a
little bit.

After communicating my flight information with my future company (Monstar Lab)
and the agency that helped me get the job (INNTEGRA), we decided that the best
course of action due to the limited time available to use would be placing me in
a shared house for a month during which I'd find an apartment on my own. Shared
house, by the way, is exactly what it sounds like -- a place shared by multiple
people (usually between three and sixteen) with shared common areas but separate
bedrooms for everyone. However, after exchanging a few e-mails with Monstar Lab
and several shared houses, it turned out that this approach is not a correct one
either -- apparently when shared house says in the advertisement that
"foreigners are welcome", it really means "foreigners who can speak Japanese
welcome". I think at this point I might not have alone in feeling a fit freaked
out, so another agency (ALTEGRA) was called to help with the housing
arrangements.

A representative from ALTEGRA, Emma, got in touch with me very quickly, found
out what exactly I expect from my future apartment and told me that she'll find
something for me in exactly two days -- and in exactly two days, she did, in
fact she came up with a couple of options, so I could even be relatively picky.
Due to both apartments being really similar, I chose the one that was closer to
my work (commuting takes only around ~25 minutes, which is really awesome for
Tokyo). It was possible to reserve the apartment online for my name, but
unfortunately signing the actual contract would have to be done in person, so I
was given a few instructions regarding what to do and say at immigration office
when arriving in Japan and where to go to sign the contract. I can not describe
the feeling of relief I felt at that moment, as I was getting worried that
sleeping on a bench in a park might be a reality in my immediate future.

Unfortunately, in the end, not everything went as smoothly as I imagined it
would.

After arriving in Japan, I had no trouble exchanging my hard-earned Certificate
of Eligibility for a Residence Card, grabbed my two pieces of luggage which
represent my life now, boarded the Narita Express in the direction of Tokyo and
left the train at Shibuya station, which is the train station closest to the
real estate agency that would be renting me a brand new apartment. After a
while of walking around that place, I found the office, entered, introduced
myself, asked if English is fine, got back answer that English is not fine and
I felt my heart sinking. I tried to communicate in a broken Japanese my
intentions but in the end, we just mutually gave up, I gave the people there a
phone number for Emma and crossed my fingers that everything. About an hour and
few more phone calls later, Anne from INNTEGRA suddenly appeared at the office
along with her boss in order to save my sorry ass.

However, what looked like a simple task -- sign a contract, get the keys -- in
the beginning turned out to be an activity for an entire day. First, we needed
to sign the contract after filling a couple of forms, which went almost smoothly
this time if it wasn't for the fact that I, of course, didn't have a Japanese
phone number at that time yet (foolishly wanting to sort out a place to live
first).

After that, the people from the real estate agency had a look at my Residency
Card and unfortunately, they were not pleased -- the address was not filled[^1],
so before handing me the keys, that had to be fixed first, which resulted in a
trip to Shinagawa city hall, waiting few minutes until we can hand an Address
Change Request form to the city hall workers, then proceeding to wait for 30
more minutes until they put my new address onto the Residency Card. After we
were done with this ordeal, a trip back to Shibuya was necessary just to finish
all the paperwork, pay first 1.5 months of rent and finally obtain my keys --
except that the last part didn't happen because the Shibuya branch of this real
estate agency doesn't hand out keys, apparently, so a quick trip to Shinjuku
branch was the last step, a final boss to fight in order to get my apartment.
Fortunately, this part finally went without a hitch, and after about 6 hours of
travelling around Tokyo, filling forms and signing papers, I could go to my new
home in Shinagawa.

[^1]: I was instructed by Emma to have the Immigration Office fill in an address
    of my fiancée in Joyo, Kyoto prefecture into my Residence Card. Why they
    didn't do that, I'll never know, but maybe -- maybe it was actually a
    blessing in disguise in the end. Apparently, if they put that address in, I
    might have been required to go to Joyo city hall in order to change the
    address from Joyo to Shinagawa, and going to Kyoto prefecture from Tokyo
    involves about 2.5 hours trip that costs ~13000 yen (&#8776;&nbsp;$120).
    That's for a one-way ticket, by the way.

And to slowly finish up, I shouldn't forget that Emma, Anne and her boss weren't
the only people whose help I gladly received -- my lovely fiancée already in
advance made sure that electricity, water and gas is enabled for the apartment,
and my only task was to be at the apartment by 5 PM to welcome a person from the
gas company that would quickly inspect all the equipment. Needless to say, due
to all the paperwork that I had to undergo on that day, I didn't make it back to
the apartment at 5 PM exactly, but fortunately the gas inspector arrived at
around 5:45 PM and I was already in the process of unpacking at that point.

Finally, shortly after 6 PM the doorbell rang again, this time due to a futon
delivery, also a courtesy of my fiancée -- and the timing meant I don't have to
sleep on the carpet for even one night -- which was especially appreciated
thanks to the fact that right the very next day was my first day at new work!
But more about that in another article.

Finally, let me close this article with a funny/sad story about getting an
access to the Internet in my new apartment. While Internet contract is actually
a part of the lease, I was warned that the Internet connection that comes with
the apartment is really, really sketchy, slow and unstable. After arriving in
the apartment, I noticed a LAN cable coming out of the wall and entering a
sort-of breaker box out of which came out a micro-USB cable. That micro-USB
cable then leads into a tiny wireless router (as a power source and input source
for the Internet connection), so needless to say, just seeing this weird set-up
didn't exactly fill me with hopes, but I tried connecting to the router
nevertheless.

The speed was exactly as horrible as I was warned, and the Internet was so
unstable it wasn't even possible to make a Skype or FaceTime audio call.
Furthermore, the router only always worked for 59 minutes after which it needed
to be unplugged and plugged back to electricity.

The only way to remove this one-hour restriction was to perform a first-time
setup. Normally, that wouldn't be a problem, as any router I have ever seen is
easily configurable via a web interface, but not this devil's invention. To
configure this weird router, one has to plug it into a TV via the router's HDMI
out and navigate the on-screen menus by tapping remote control-like buttons in
a smartphone app.

I swear I'm not making this up.

Thankfully, just buying normal WiFi router on the very next day and throwing
that old joke of a router into the recycled trash (remember, we're in Japan)
solved my issues immediately and suddenly, I'm enjoying a symmetrical 100/100
Mbps connection.
